Performance Analysis
• Amdahl’s Law: fixed problem size ⇒ speedup limited by
the serial fraction (strong scaling, pessimistic bound).

• Gustafson’s Law: scaled problem size ⇒ speedup grows
with processors as parallel work increases (weak scaling,
optimistic view).
• Karp–Flatt metric: empirical measure ⇒ extracts
effective serial fraction from observed speedup
(diagnoses overhead and scalability).
1

Isoefficiency
• When we increase the number of processes for a fixed
problem size, the efficiency typically decreases because
communication overhead and synchronization costs
grow.
• If we increase both the problem size and the number of
processors, we can often maintain a constant efficiency.
• Isoefficiency answers the question: “How must the
problem size grow to maintain constant efficiency?”
2

Derivation
• W = Ts (serial time or total work)
• Total overhead: To = p Tp = W
• Parallel runtime: Tp = (W + To) / p
• Efficiency: E = W / (p Tp) = W / (W + To)
• Solving for W:

(Homework)

W = K To

where K = E / (1 – E)
3

Example
• Work: n additions (W)
• Communication: Uses a binary tree reduction. Each of
the log p stages involves communication.
• Overhead To : Each of the p processes spends O(log p)
time on communication ⇒ To = O(p log p).
• To keep constant efficiency, force the work to be
proportional to the overhead, i.e,

W = K (p log p) = n
• Because n must grow at the rate of p log p to keep the
processes busy, the isoefficiency function is O(p log p).

4

Interpretation
• O(p), highly scalable ⇒ Only need to increase the data
proportionally to the processes.
• O(p log p), scalable ⇒ Slight increase in data per process
is needed.
• O(p2), poorly scalable ⇒ Need to quadrupedal the data
every time you double the processes.
• Exponential, non-scalable ⇒ The algorithm will fail to
keep up on large clusters.
5

CPSC 375 High-Performance Computing
Lecture 28

Parallel Sorting Algorithms II

Batcher’s Parallel Sorting Algorithms
• Odd-even Mergesort
• Bitonic Mergesort
• Originally derived in terms of switching networks.
• Both are well-balanced and have parallel time complexity
of O(log2n) with n processors.

7

Odd-Even Mergesort
• Start with odd-even merge algorithm which will merge
two sorted lists into one sorted list.
• Given two sorted lists a1, a2, a3, …, an and b1, b2, b3, …, bn
(where n is a power of 2)
• Elements with odd indices of each sequence, a1, a3, …, an-1
and b1, b3, …, bn-1 are merged into one sorted list, c1, c2, c3,
…, cn.
• Elements with even indices of each sequence, a2, a4, …, an,
and b2, b4, …, bn are merged into one sorted list, d1, d2, d3,
…, dn.
• The final sorted list, e1, e2, e3, …, en is obtained by:
e2i = min{ci+1, di} e2i+1 = max{ci+1, di}
8

Odd-Even Mergesort, Example

9

Odd-Even Mergesort

10

Odd-Even Mergesort
• Essentially the odd and even index lists are interleaved,
and pairs of odd/even elements are interchanged to move
the larger toward one end, if necessary.
• First number is given by e1 = c1 (since this will be the
smallest of the first elements of each list, a1 or b1)
• Last number by e2n = dn (since this will be the largest of
the last elements of each list, an or bn).
• Pairs of processors perform the compare-and-exchange
operations.
• Can be implemented with hardware units that perform
the compare-and-exchange operations.
11

Bitonic Mergesort
Bitonic Sequence
• A monotonic increasing sequence is a sequence of
increasing numbers.
• A bitonic sequence has two sequences, one increasing and
one decreasing. e.g.

a0  a1  a2, a3, …, ai−1  ai  ai+1, …, an−2  an−1
for some value of i (0  i  n).
• A sequence is also bitonic if the preceding can be
achieved by shifting the numbers cyclically (left or right).
12

Bitonic Sequences

13

Bitonic Sequences
If we perform a compare-and-exchange operation on ai with
ai+n/2
For all i, where there are n numbers in the sequence, get
two bitonic sequences, where the numbers in one sequence are
all less than the numbers in the other sequence.

14

Sorting Bitonic Sequences
• Compare-andexchange moves
smaller numbers of
each pair to left and
larger numbers of
pair to right.
• Given a bitonic
sequence, recursively
performing operations
will sort the list.
15

Bitonic Sorting
1. To sort an unordered sequence, sequences are merged into
larger bitonic sequences, starting with pairs of adjacent
numbers.
2. By a compare-and-exchange operation, pairs of adjacent
numbers are formed into increasing sequences and
decreasing sequences, pairs of which form a bitonic sequence
of twice the size of each of the original sequences.
3. By repeating this process, bitonic sequences of larger
lengths are obtained.
4. In the final step, a single bitonic sequence is sorted into a
single increasing sequence.
16

Bitonic Sorting

17

Bitonic Sorting, Example

18

Bitonic Sorting, Example

19

Bitonic Sorting, Phases
The six steps (for eight numbers) are divided into three phases:
Phase 1. Convert pairs of numbers into increasing/
decreasing sequences and hence into 4-bit bitonic sequences.
Phase 2. Split each 4-bit bitonic sequence into two 2-bit
bitonic sequences, higher sequences at center.
Sort each 4-bit bitonic sequence increasing/ decreasing
sequences and merge into 8-bit bitonic sequence.

Phase 3 Sort 8-bit bitonic sequence.
20

Bitonic Sorting, Analysis
In general, with n = 2k, there are k phases, each of 1, 2, 3, …, k
steps. Hence the total number of steps is given by

21

23

